README.md, before:

![platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/platform-Raspberry%20Pi%20Zero%202%20W-red)
![kernel](https://img.shields.io/badge/kernel-6.12.x--v7-green)
![license](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPLv2-blue)
![realtime](https://img.shields.io/badge/realtime-SCHED_FIFO_99-critical)
![memory](https://img.shields.io/badge/memory-mlockall-orange)

# TaaS — Time as a Service (Enterprise Edition)

**Deterministic hardware time access and PTP node for Raspberry Pi (BCM2837)**

---

## Overview

**TaaS (Time as a Service)** is a low-level timing architecture focused on **deterministic, low-latency time access** on Linux-based embedded systems.

Instead of relying on syscall-based clocks (`clock_gettime`, hrtimers, vDSO), TaaS exposes the **BCM2837 64-bit System Timer** directly to user space via a minimal kernel driver and an `mmap()`-based MMIO interface.

The goal is not abstraction — the goal is **predictability**.

This project exists because:
* Scheduler latency exists
* Syscalls are not free
* Time-sensitive systems should read time, not ask for it

---

## Design Goals

* Deterministic reads (no scheduler involvement)
* Zero-copy MMIO access
* No timekeeping reinvention
* Minimal kernel surface area
* Clear failure modes
* No background threads in kernel space

If you need portability or POSIX compliance, this is not for you.

---

## System Architecture

TaaS maps the hardware timer directly into user space.  
The kernel is used only to **validate, map and protect access**.

```text
┌──────────────────────────────┐
│     BCM2837 SoC Hardware     │
│  64-bit System Timer (ST)    │
└───────────────┬──────────────┘
                │ MMIO
┌───────────────▼──────────────┐
│      Kernel Module (taas)    │
│  - Non-cached page mapping   │
│  - Atomic 64-bit read logic  │
│  - miscdevice (/dev/taas)    │
└───────────────┬──────────────┘
                │ mmap()
┌───────────────▼──────────────┐
│        User Space Node       │
│  - SCHED_FIFO (prio 99)      │
│  - mlockall(MCL_CURRENT|FUT) │
│  - UDP time responder        │
└──────────────────────────────┘
````

No kernel threads.
No ioctl spam.
No polling inside the kernel.

---

## Kernel Driver (`taas_driver.c`)

The kernel module performs **three tasks only**:

1. Maps the System Timer registers using MMIO
2. Ensures non-cached access (`pgprot_noncached`)
3. Exposes a read-only memory region via `mmap()`

### Atomicity

BCM2837 exposes the timer via two 32-bit registers.
The driver implements a verification loop to guarantee a **consistent 64-bit read** without locks.

No spinlocks.
No IRQ hooks.
No scheduler interaction.

---

## User Space Node (`taas_node.c`)

The user-space daemon is intentionally simple and written in plain C.

Key properties:

* Runs under `SCHED_FIFO` priority 99
* Memory fully locked using `mlockall()`
* No dynamic allocation after init
* No libc time functions
* Reads hardware time directly from mapped memory

The process does not *request* time — it **loads it**.

---

## Installation

### Requirements

* Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W
  (RPi 3/4 supported with adjusted MMIO offsets)
* Raspberry Pi OS (Debian 13 / newer)
* Kernel headers

```bash
sudo apt install raspberrypi-kernel-headers
```

### Setup

```bash
chmod +x setup_taas.sh
sudo ./setup_taas.sh
```

The script:

* Builds the kernel module
* Loads it via `modprobe`
* Installs udev rules
* Registers a systemd service

No manual intervention required after reboot.

---

## Compatibility Matrix

| Component    | Status                  |
| ------------ | ----------------------- |
| Hardware     | Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W ✅ |
| SoC          | BCM2837 ✅               |
| Architecture | armv7l (32-bit) ✅       |
| Kernel       | Linux 6.12.x-rpi-v7 ✅   |
| Time Source  | System Timer (µs) ✅     |

---

## Validation

Basic UDP sanity check:

```bash
echo -n "ping" | nc -u -w 1 127.0.0.1 1588 | hexdump -C
```

Example output:

```hexdump
00000000  0c a5 12 41 1e 00 00 00  |...A....|
```

The returned value is the **raw System Timer value**, little-endian, in microseconds.

No conversion.
No scaling.
No correction.

---

## Limitations

* Not portable
* Tied to BCM2837 memory layout
* Not synchronized by default
* No clock discipline logic
* No leap second handling

This is intentional.

---

## License

GPLv2
Kernel code follows Linux kernel licensing conventions.

---

## Philosophy

> In real-time systems, abstraction is latency.
> The kernel should protect access — not stand in the way.

Commit message:

docs: document deterministic MMIO-based time access architecture
- Describe direct BCM2837 system timer access
- Explain MMIO mmap design and atomic 64-bit reads
- Document SCHED_FIFO, mlockall and CPU isolation requirements
- Add validation and limitations sections

README.md, after:

![platform](https://img.shields.io/badge/platform-Raspberry%20Pi%20Zero%202%20W-red)
![kernel](https://img.shields.io/badge/kernel-6.12.x--v7-green)
![license](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-GPLv2-blue)
![realtime](https://img.shields.io/badge/realtime-SCHED_FIFO_99-critical)
![memory](https://img.shields.io/badge/memory-mlockall-orange)

# TaaS — Time as a Service (Enterprise Edition)

**Deterministic hardware time access and PTP node for Raspberry Pi (BCM2837)**

---

## Overview

**TaaS (Time as a Service)** is a low-level timing architecture focused on **deterministic, low-latency time access** on Linux-based embedded systems.

Instead of relying on syscall-based clocks (`clock_gettime`, hrtimers, vDSO), TaaS exposes the **BCM2837 64-bit System Timer** directly to user space via a minimal kernel driver and an `mmap()`-based MMIO interface.

The goal is not abstraction — the goal is **predictability**.

This project exists because:
* Scheduler latency exists
* Syscalls are not free
* Time-sensitive systems should read time, not ask for it

---

## Design Goals

* Deterministic reads (no scheduler involvement)
* Zero-copy MMIO access
* No timekeeping reinvention
* Minimal kernel surface area
* Clear failure modes
* No background threads in kernel space

If you need portability or POSIX compliance, this is not for you.

---

## System Architecture

TaaS maps the hardware timer directly into user space.  
The kernel is used only to **validate, map and protect access**.

```text
┌──────────────────────────────┐
│     BCM2837 SoC Hardware     │
│  64-bit System Timer (ST)    │
└───────────────┬──────────────┘
                │ MMIO
┌───────────────▼──────────────┐
│      Kernel Module (taas)    │
│  - Non-cached page mapping   │
│  - Atomic 64-bit read logic  │
│  - miscdevice (/dev/taas)    │
└───────────────┬──────────────┘
                │ mmap()
┌───────────────▼──────────────┐
│        User Space Node       │
│  - SCHED_FIFO (prio 99)      │
│  - mlockall(MCL_CURRENT|FUT) │
│  - UDP time responder        │
└──────────────────────────────┘
````

No kernel threads.
No ioctl spam.
No polling inside the kernel.

---

## Kernel Driver (`taas_driver.c`)

The kernel module performs **three tasks only**:

1. Maps the System Timer registers using MMIO
2. Ensures non-cached access (`pgprot_noncached`)
3. Exposes a read-only memory region via `mmap()`

### Atomicity

BCM2837 exposes the timer via two 32-bit registers.
The driver implements a verification loop to guarantee a **consistent 64-bit read** without locks.

No spinlocks.
No IRQ hooks.
No scheduler interaction.

---

## User Space Node (`taas_node.c`)

The user-space daemon is intentionally simple and written in plain C.

Key properties:

* Runs under `SCHED_FIFO` priority 99
* Memory fully locked using `mlockall()`
* No dynamic allocation after init
* No libc time functions
* Reads hardware time directly from mapped memory

The process does not *request* time — it **loads it**.

---

## Installation

### Requirements

* Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W
  (RPi 3/4 supported with adjusted MMIO offsets)
* Raspberry Pi OS (Debian 13 / newer)
* Kernel headers

```bash
sudo apt install raspberrypi-kernel-headers
```

### Setup

```bash
chmod +x setup_taas.sh
sudo ./setup_taas.sh
```

To ensure deterministic behavior and avoid scheduler interference, the Raspberry Pi **must** be configured with CPU isolation and tickless operation.

Edit `/boot/cmdline.txt` and append (single line, space-separated):

```text
isolcpus=3 rcu_nocbs=3 nohz_full=3
```

This dedicates **CPU core 3** exclusively to the TaaS user-space node.

The script:

* Builds the kernel module
* Loads it via `modprobe`
* Installs udev rules
* Registers a systemd service

No manual intervention required after reboot.

---

## Compatibility Matrix

| Component    | Status                  |
| ------------ | ----------------------- |
| Hardware     | Raspberry Pi Zero 2 W ✅ |
| SoC          | BCM2837 ✅               |
| Architecture | armv7l (32-bit) ✅       |
| Kernel       | Linux 6.12.x-rpi-v7 ✅   |
| Time Source  | System Timer (µs) ✅     |

---

## Validation

Basic UDP sanity check:

```bash
echo -n "ping" | nc -u -w 1 127.0.0.1 1588 | hexdump -C
```

Example output:

```hexdump
00000000  0c a5 12 41 1e 00 00 00  |...A....|
```

The returned value is the **raw System Timer value**, little-endian, in microseconds.

No conversion.
No scaling.
No correction.

---

## Limitations

* Not portable
* Tied to BCM2837 memory layout
* Not synchronized by default
* No clock discipline logic
* No leap second handling

This is intentional.

---

## License

GPLv2
Kernel code follows Linux kernel licensing conventions.

---

## Philosophy

> In real-time systems, abstraction is latency.
> The kernel should protect access — not stand in the way.
